v5.0.0-beta.0 (#2619)
mui-org/material-ui-x: CHANGELOG.md

All notable changes to this project will be documented in this file.
See [Conventional Commits](https://conventionalcommits.org) for commit guidelines.

## 5.0.0-beta.0

_Sep 16, 2021_

🎉 This is the first release of the data grid component with full support of the new MUI 5.0 release 🎉!

A big thanks to the 9 contributors who made this release possible. Here are some highlights ✨:

- ⚡ Migrate to the new `@mui/material` and `@mui/styles` packages and drop support for `@material-ui/core` (#2515, #2571) @m4theushw

> - 📚 Migrate to the new documentation infrastructure and design (#2441) @DanailH

Reviewer: It's internal.

```suggestion
```

Author: I added it for the design modification

> - 📚 Migrate to the new documentation infrastructure and design (#2441) @DanailH

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- 📚 Migrate to the new documentation infrastructure and design (#2441) (@DanailH, @m4theushw)
```

> - 🚀 Introduce the row menu feature  (#2385) @m4theushw

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 🎁 Add `actions` column type (#2385) @m4theushw
```

> - 🚀 Introduce the row menu feature  (#2385) @m4theushw

Reviewer 2: Should we add a demo or link to the docs?

Author: Totally yes
I just struggle to access the doc and get the correct URL https://next.material-ui.com/components/data-grid/columns/
Probably due to the migration to `mui.com`

Reviewer: The docs for the development branch is now at https://next--material-ui-x.netlify.app/components/data-grid/columns/#column-types

Author: So in the changelog I add https://mui.com/components/data-grid/columns/#column-types right ?

Reviewer 2: I think so yes

> - 🚀 Introduce the `disableVirtualization` prop (#2326) @m4theushw

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 👁 Allow to disable virtualization with the `disableVirtualization` prop (#2326) @m4theushw
```

> - 🚀 Introduce the new `isRowSelected` api method (#2523) @flaviendelangle

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 🚀 Introduce the new `isRowSelected` api method (#2523) @flaviendelangle
- 🕹️ Show page size controls on smaller resolutions (#2461) @michaldudak
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 🚀 Introduce the new `isRowSelected` API method (#2523) @flaviendelangle
```

- 🌎 Add Simplified Chinese (zhCN) localization (#2431) @wlf100220

> - 🌎 Add Korean (koKR) localization (#2446) @zzossig

Reviewer: Keeping the tradition.

```suggestion
- 🌎 Add Korean (koKR) localization (#2446) @zzossig
- 🐞 Bugfixes
```

### `@mui/x-data-grid@v5.0.0-beta.0` / `@mui/x-data-grid-pro@v5.0.0-beta.0`

#### Breaking changes

> - [DataGridPro] Remove apiRef getState method

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [DataGridPro] Remove `apiRef.current.getState`. Use `apiRef.current.state` instead. (#2579) @flaviendelangle
```

> - [DataGridPro] Remove apiRef getState method

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [DataGridPro] Remove `apiRef.current.getState` method
```

  ```diff
  -const state = apiRef.current.getState();
  +const state = apiRef.current.state
  ```

> - [DataGridPro] Unification of the selection API parameters between `selectRow` and `selectRows`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [DataGridPro] The third argument in `apiRef.current.selectRow` is now inverted to keep consistency with other selection APIs. (#2523) @flaviendelangle
```

  ```diff
  -selectRow: (id: GridRowId, isSelected?: boolean, allowMultiple?: boolean = false) => void;
  +selectRow: (id: GridRowId, isSelected?: boolean, resetSelection?: boolean = false) => void;
  ```

> - [DataGrid] Replace the `options` with direct prop reads

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [DataGrid] Remove the `options` prop from the return of `useGridSlotComponentProps`.
```

>   ```diff
>   -const { options } = useGridSlotComponentProps();
>   +const rootProps = useGridRootProps();
>   ``` 

Reviewer: `useGridRootProps` is not exported.

```suggestion
```

Author: That's a shame...
I'm doing a quick PR to export it

> 

Reviewer: #2515 has a breaking change too. Edit this comment to get the right suggestion to apply.

```suggestion
- [DataGrid] The module augmentation is not enabled by default. This change was done to prevent conflicts with projects using `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro` together. 

  In order to still be able to do overrides at the theme level, add the following imports to your project:

  ```diff
  +import type {} from '@mui/x-data-grid/themeAugmentation';
  +import type {} from '@mui/x-data-grid-pro/themeAugmentation';
  ```
```

#### Changes

> - [DataGridPro] Only apply checkboxSelectionVisibleOnly when pagination is enabled (#2443) @flaviendelangle

Reviewer 2: Can you check the other places where we have code like text and wrap it in `` ;)

```suggestion
- [DataGridPro] Only apply `checkboxSelectionVisibleOnly` when pagination is enabled (#2443) @flaviendelangle
```

Author: Yes of course

Author: Done

> - [DataGridPro] Remove apiRef getState method (#2579) @flaviendelangle

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [DataGridPro] Remove `apiRef.current.getState` method (#2579) @flaviendelangle
```

- [DataGrid] Add `disableVirtualization` prop (#2326) @m4theushw
- [DataGrid] Add missing exports from param models (#2448) @flaviendelangle
- [DataGrid] Add missing keys to the `classes` prop (#2458) @m4theushw

> - [DataGrid] Add row menu (#2385) @m4theushw

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [DataGrid] Add `actions` column type (#2385) @m4theushw
```

- [DataGrid] Add zhCN localization (#2431) @wlf100220
- [DataGrid] Add koKR localization (#2446) @zzossig
- [DataGrid] Clean the selection public api (#2523) @flaviendelangle

> - [DataGrid] Do not call `useGridColumnResize` and `useGridInfiniteLoader (#2580) @flaviendelangle

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [DataGrid] Do not call `useGridColumnResize` and `useGridInfiniteLoader` (#2580) @flaviendelangle
```

- [DataGrid] Do not show right border of last column header when its cells don't have it (#2444) @flaviendelangle
- [DataGrid] Don't consider unselectable rows when `selectionModel` is used (#2464) @m4theushw
- [DataGrid] Drop v4 support (#2515) @m4theushw
- [DataGrid] Fire `columnOrderChange` event after state update (#2451) @flaviendelangle
- [DataGrid] Fix TypeScript type error for toolbar components (#2393) @ZeeshanTamboli
- [DataGrid] Fix navigation between column headers with rows filtered (#2440) @m4theushw
- [DataGrid] Force `scrollEndThreshold` to undefined (#2574) @flaviendelangle

> - [DataGrid] Improve jaJP localization (#2502) @daikiojm

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [DataGrid] Improve Japanese (jaJP) locale (#2502) @daikiojm
```

Reviewer: Will you apply the suggestion? We have been using the "French (frFR) locale" format in the past releases.

- [DataGrid] Make `hideFooterRowCount` prop available only for DataGridPro (#2564) @ZeeshanTamboli

> - [DataGrid] Pressing `Escape` should close `GridColumnHeaderMenu` without errors (#2463) @DanailH

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [DataGrid] Pressing <kbd>Escape</kbd> should close `GridColumnHeaderMenu` without errors (#2463) @DanailH
```

- [DataGrid] Prevent scroll when selecting rows (#2558) @m4theushw
- [DataGrid] Reduce specificity of `GridToolbarContainer` styles (#2462) @michaldudak
- [DataGrid] Remove import to `@material-ui/icons` (#2576) @m4theushw

> - [DataGrid] Show page size controls on narrower screens (#2461) @michaldudak

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [DataGrid] Show page size controls on smaller resolutions (#2461) @michaldudak
```

- [DataGrid] Vertically align column header icons (#2555) @oliviertassinari

> - [bug] The numeric filter operators are not handling '0' correctly (#2528) @flaviendelangle

Reviewer 2: We haven't used `[bug]` before (I would even put it as `bugfix` as that si the label in GitHub). To have it as `bugfix` and be consistent some of the other entries needs to be updated as well.

Author: I can put `[DataGrid]` 
Making a release is nice, I'm noticing all the things I'm not doing correctly on my PR :smile:

Reviewer 2: I think we can go with `DataGrid` and later maybe reevaluate.

#### Docs

- [docs] Clarify confusion (#2525) @oliviertassinari
- [docs] Fix JSDoc comments (#2452) @m4theushw
- [docs] Fix event argument in onXXX props (#2391) @m4theushw
- [docs] Improve SEO ranking (#2467) @oliviertassinari
- [docs] Replace 'paging' with 'pagination' (#2459) @michaldudak
- [docs] Use same infra from v5 (#2441) @DanailH

#### Core

- [core] Add typing to the details argument (#2512) @flaviendelangle
- [core] Allow to create one logger per Grid instance (#2529) @flaviendelangle
- [core] Clean `GridSimpleOptions` interface (#2578) @flaviendelangle
- [core] Fix PR detection mechanism for upstream PRs @oliviertassinari
- [core] Generate propTypes (#2395) @m4theushw
- [core] Improve the feedback loop from developers (#2468) @oliviertassinari
- [core] List the requirement of each hook (#2319) @flaviendelangle
- [core] Only create one `GridEventEmitter` per Grid (#2504) @flaviendelangle

> - [core] Only run Prettier on files different from 'next' instead of 'master' (#2566) @flaviendelangle

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [core] Only run Prettier on files different from `next` instead of `master` (#2566) @flaviendelangle
```

- [core] Polish issue template (#2503) @oliviertassinari
- [core] Prepare `x-grid-data-generator` for noImplicitAny (#2505) @flaviendelangle
- [core] Provide theme augmentation as separate module (#2520) @m4theushw

> - [core] Publish GridEvents.rowsSet when the rows state is modified after props.rows is updated (#2530) @flaviendelangle

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [core] Publish `GridEvents.rowsSet` when the rows state is modified after `props.rows` is updated (#2530) @flaviendelangle
```

- [core] Remove `state.isScrolling` (#2337) @m4theushw
- [core] Remove useless apiRef optional chaining or non-null assertions (#2455) @flaviendelangle
- [core] Replace remaining `@material-ui` usages (#2577) @m4theushw
- [core] Replace the options with direct prop reads (#2433) @flaviendelangle
- [core] Skip update on initial render (#2344) @oliviertassinari
- [core] Small changes (#2607) @flaviendelangle
- [core] Small fixes (#2511) @flaviendelangle
- [core] Support for `@mui` packages (#2571) @m4theushw
- [core] Synchronously subscribe to events in `useGridApiEventHandler` (#2557) @flaviendelangle

> - [core] Update browserslistrc (#2384) @DanailH

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [core] Update `.browserslistrc` file (#2384) @DanailH
```

All notable changes to this project will be documented in this file.
See [Conventional Commits](https://conventionalcommits.org) for commit guidelines.

## 5.0.0-beta.0

_Sep 16, 2021_

> 🎉 This is the first release of the data grid component with full support of the new MUI 5.0 release 🎉!

Reviewer: It's not "full" yet. We don't support the `sx` prop nor @emotion.

```suggestion
🎉 This is the first release with support for the new MUI v5 🎉! In the next releases, we will be working to bring all the cool features from MUI v5 to the advanced components.
```

A big thanks to the 9 contributors who made this release possible. Here are some highlights ✨:

- ⚡ Migrate to the new `@mui/material` and `@mui/styles` packages and drop support for `@material-ui/core` (#2515, #2571) @m4theushw

> - 📚 Migrate to the new documentation infrastructure and design (#2441) (@DanailH, @m4theushw)

Reviewer: This one can be moved to the end of the list. It's not important for users.

> - 🎁 Add `actions` column type (#2385) @m4theushw

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 🎁 Add `actions` column type (#2385) @m4theushw

  See the documentation for [more details](https://mui.com/components/data-grid/columns/#column-types).

```

  ```diff
  -selectRow: (id: GridRowId, isSelected?: boolean, allowMultiple?: boolean = false) => void;
  +selectRow: (id: GridRowId, isSelected?: boolean, resetSelection?: boolean = false) => void;
  ```

- [DataGrid] Replace the `options` with direct prop reads

  ```diff
  -const { options } = useGridSlotComponentProps();
  +const rootProps = useGridRootProps();
  ``` 
- [DataGrid] The module augmentation is not enabled by default. This change was done to prevent conflicts with projects using `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro` together. 

  In order to still be able to do overrides at the theme level, add the following imports to your project:
- [DataGrid] The module augmentation is not enabled by default. This change was done to prevent conflicts with projects using `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro` together. 

  In order to still be able to do overrides at the theme level, add the following imports to your project:

  ```diff
  +import type {} from '@mui/x-data-grid/themeAugmentation';
  +import type {} from '@mui/x-data-grid-pro/themeAugmentation';
  ```diff
  +import type {} from '@mui/x-data-grid/themeAugmentation';

>   +import type {} from '@mui/x-data-grid-pro/themeAugmentation';

Reviewer: It's duplicated.

#### Changes

- [DataGridPro] Only apply `checkboxSelectionVisibleOnly` when pagination is enabled (#2443) @flaviendelangle
- [DataGridPro] Remove `apiRef.current.getState` method (#2579) @flaviendelangle
- [DataGrid] Add `disableVirtualization` prop (#2326) @m4theushw
- [DataGrid] Add missing exports from param models (#2448) @flaviendelangle
- [DataGrid] Add missing keys to the `classes` prop (#2458) @m4theushw
- [DataGrid] Add `actions` column type (#2385) @m4theushw
- [DataGrid] Add zhCN localization (#2431) @wlf100220
- [DataGrid] Add koKR localization (#2446) @zzossig

> - [DataGrid] Clean the selection public api (#2523) @flaviendelangle

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [DataGrid] Clean the selection public API (#2523) @flaviendelangle
```

- [DataGrid] Do not call `useGridColumnResize` and `useGridInfiniteLoader` (#2580) @flaviendelangle
- [DataGrid] Do not show right border of last column header when its cells don't have it (#2444) @flaviendelangle
- [DataGrid] Don't consider unselectable rows when `selectionModel` is used (#2464) @m4theushw
- [DataGrid] Drop v4 support (#2515) @m4theushw
- [DataGrid] Fire `columnOrderChange` event after state update (#2451) @flaviendelangle
- [DataGrid] Fix TypeScript type error for toolbar components (#2393) @ZeeshanTamboli
- [DataGrid] Fix navigation between column headers with rows filtered (#2440) @m4theushw
- [DataGrid] Force `scrollEndThreshold` to undefined (#2574) @flaviendelangle
- [DataGrid] Improve jaJP localization (#2502) @daikiojm
- [DataGrid] Make `hideFooterRowCount` prop available only for DataGridPro (#2564) @ZeeshanTamboli

> - [DataGrid] Pressing <kbd>Escape</kbd> should close `GridColumnHeaderMenu` without errors (#2463) @DanailH

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [DataGrid] Fix a bug where pressing <kbd>Escape</kbd> was not closing the `GridColumnHeaderMenu` (#2463) @DanailH
```

- [DataGrid] Prevent scroll when selecting rows (#2558) @m4theushw
- [DataGrid] Reduce specificity of `GridToolbarContainer` styles (#2462) @michaldudak
- [DataGrid] Remove import to `@material-ui/icons` (#2576) @m4theushw
- [DataGrid] Show page size controls on smaller resolutions (#2461) @michaldudak
- [DataGrid] Vertically align column header icons (#2555) @oliviertassinari

> - [DataGrid] The numeric filter operators are not handling '0' correctly (#2528) @flaviendelangle

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [DataGrid] Fix numeric filter operators not handling '0' correctly (#2528) @flaviendelangle
```

#### Docs

> - [docs] Clarify confusion (#2525) @oliviertassinari

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [docs] Clarify confusion between licenses (#2525) @oliviertassinari
```

- [docs] Fix JSDoc comments (#2452) @m4theushw
- [docs] Fix event argument in onXXX props (#2391) @m4theushw
- [docs] Improve SEO ranking (#2467) @oliviertassinari
- [docs] Replace 'paging' with 'pagination' (#2459) @michaldudak

> - [docs] Use same infra from v5 (#2441) @DanailH

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [docs] Use same infrastructure from v5 (#2441) @DanailH
```

- [core] Fix PR detection mechanism for upstream PRs @oliviertassinari
- [core] Generate propTypes (#2395) @m4theushw
- [core] Improve the feedback loop from developers (#2468) @oliviertassinari
- [core] List the requirement of each hook (#2319) @flaviendelangle
- [core] Only create one `GridEventEmitter` per Grid (#2504) @flaviendelangle
- [core] Only run Prettier on files different from `next` instead of `master` (#2566) @flaviendelangle
- [core] Polish issue template (#2503) @oliviertassinari
- [core] Prepare `x-grid-data-generator` for noImplicitAny (#2505) @flaviendelangle
- [core] Provide theme augmentation as separate module (#2520) @m4theushw
- [core] Publish `GridEvents.rowsSet` when the rows state is modified after `props.rows` is updated (#2530) @flaviendelangle
- [core] Remove `state.isScrolling` (#2337) @m4theushw
- [core] Remove useless apiRef optional chaining or non-null assertions (#2455) @flaviendelangle
- [core] Replace remaining `@material-ui` usages (#2577) @m4theushw
- [core] Replace the options with direct prop reads (#2433) @flaviendelangle
- [core] Skip update on initial render (#2344) @oliviertassinari

> - [core] Small changes (#2607) @flaviendelangle
> - [core] Small fixes (#2511) @flaviendelangle

Reviewer: We can group these.

```suggestion
- [core] Small changes (#2607, #2511) @flaviendelangle
```

All notable changes to this project will be documented in this file.
See [Conventional Commits](https://conventionalcommits.org) for commit guidelines.

## 5.0.0-beta.0

_Sep 16, 2021_

🎉 This is the first release with support for the new MUI v5 🎉! In the next releases, we will be working to bring all the cool features from MUI v5 to the advanced components.

> A big thanks to the 9 contributors who made this release possible. Here are some highlights ✨:

Reviewer: cc @oliviertassinari 

```suggestion
This beta version of MUI X drops support for MUI v4. We encourage everyone to upgrade to MUI v5 to be able to continue to get all the upcoming features and fixes of MUI X. New versions of MUI X v4, containing only fixes, will still be released, but in a slower pace.

A big thanks to the 9 contributors who made this release possible. Here are some highlights ✨:
```

> - ⚡ Migrate to the new `@mui/material` and `@mui/styles` packages and drop support for `@material-ui/core` (#2515, #2571) @m4theushw

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ⚡ Migrate to the new `@mui/material` and `@mui/styles` packages and drop support for `@material-ui/core` (#2515, #2571, #2620) @m4theushw
```
